**Important** If you like VisiData, sign up for the newsletter: https://tinyletter.com/visidata

# Community

- I'm hanging out in #visidata on freenode! Come by and say hi if you use VisiData. I'd love to know how you're using it!

- r/visidata (on reddit) is the forum for longer-form discussion.

- See the new webpage at visidata.org! We migrated away from RTD, as it was too much hassle and limited our functionality.

- We have some example tours generated from our automated tests. See visidata.org/tour. More will be coming with the next release!

# v0.97 has been released

The main themes for this release are:
1) commandlog replay fully operational (now running both automated tests and generating tours)
2) a quick ref guide in man page format (available in visidata via F1, and also online at visidata.org/man)
3) visidata.org is now the primary home page (we've transitioned away from readthedocs)

There are also the usual suspects: new loaders, new commands, new options, and too many improvements and bugfixes to name. It is getting ever easier to write a new command or loader in a few minutes and have it just work.

With this release, VisiData is *feature complete*. There will still be many reworkings, interface changes, added commands, tweaks, embellishments, arguments, and explanations, but as far as I can see, all of the functionality is now there. We are inching ever closer to a v1.0 that will hopefully stand the test of time.

The main goals for the next release (v0.98) are 1) a set of great tours, and 2) documentation of the internal architecture: design decisions, implementation guidelines, and API references.

Here are some more detailed descriptions of what comes with this release:

## New Loaders

- simple remote postgres loader (vd postgres://user:password@dbserver.com:6254/database)

- fixed width column detection (ls -al | vd -f fixed --skiplines 1)

## New Commands and Options

- F1 launches man page quick ref (gF1 now opens the command sheet)

- vd --diff A B shows B with changes from A in red

- a Describe Sheet with 'I' shows basic stats for every column!

- streamlined commandlog (previously called editlog) functionality
- ^D to quickly save the current cmdlog; vd -p cmdlog-1.vd to replay it
- removed movement commands (use --replay-movement to reinsert movements)
- player piano with --delay (used to make the tours on the website)

- advanced editing, can now make new sheets from whole cloth!
- 'A' to add a new sheet with some number of columns
- 'a' to add a new empty row
- 'gz=' set this column in selected rows to values from a python list expression
- 'Del'/gDel to clear a cell (set a value to None)
- 'y' to yank/delete row; 'p' to paste
- 'zy' to yank (copy) cell contents; 'zp' to paste ('gzp' to paste to all selected rows)
- 'f' to fill null cells with the previous non-null value

# End
