Extensibility
-------------

One of VisiData's core design goals is *extensibility*. Many of the
features can exist in isolation, and can be enabled or disabled
independently, without affecting other features.

So, VisiData provides many features in a modular form. These features
can be enabled by importing the module, or disabled by not importing it.
Modules should degrade or fail gracefully if they depend on another
module which has not been imported.

the ``Extensible`` base class
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Python classes usually declare and implement all methods and members in
the class definition, which exists in a single source file. A modular
feature, in contrast, is self-contained within a separate source file.

Core functionality can still be changed, as Python supports
'monkey-patching' (the ability for modules loaded after startup to add
or change functionality on existing classes).

To make this a bit easier, the core classes in
VisiData--\ ``BaseSheet``, ``Column``, and ``VisiData`` (the ``vd``
singleton)--inherit from the ``Extensible`` class, which provides some
helper functions and decorators to make monkey-patching easier and more
consistent.

All of their subclasses are then also naturally Extensible.

``Sheet`` (alias for ``TableSheet``, a subclass of BaseSheet, and the
most basic tabular sheet type) is used in the following examples, but
any other Extensible class would work similarly.

``@Extensible.api``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This decorator defines a member function on the specific class:

::

    @Sheet.api
    def foobar(sheet, ...):
        ...

Because this is a member function, the first parameter is the instance
itself. If this function were defined in the class, the first parameter
would be named ``self`` by Python convention. When members are defined
in other files, it is better to use a specific local object name instead
of ``self``:

-  VisiData: ``vd``
-  Sheet: ``sheet``
-  Column: ``col``

::

        @VisiData.api
        def example1(vd, ...):

        @Column.api
        def example2(col, ...):

``Extensible.api`` can be used either to add new member functions, or to
override existing members. To call the original function, use
``func.__wrapped__``:

::

        @Sheet.api
        def addRow(sheet, row):
            # do something first
            addRow.__wrapped__(sheet, row)

``@Extensible.class_api``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``@class_api`` works much like ``@api``, but for class methods:

::

        @Sheet.class_api
        @classmethod
        def addCommand(cls, ...):

This is used internally but may not be all that useful for plugin and
module authors. Note that ``@classmethod`` must still be provided. **The
order of multiple decorators is crucial, and the ``@Extensible.api``
decorator must always be first.**

``@Extensible.property``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This acts just like the ``@property`` decorator, if it were defined
inline to the class.

``@Extensible.cached_property``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This works like ``@property``, except it only computes the value on
first access, and then caches it for every subsequent usage. For the
VisiData singleton object (which is necessarily created before any
modules are loaded), this may be necessary to avoid circular source
dependencies. Also, global sheets should be created on the VisiData
object with ``cached_property``. This allows them to take advantage of
Sheet extensions that are loaded after the module. [Because of how
Python instantiates classes, extensions monkey-patched into a class are
not also added to already-instantiated objects.] be For Sheet objects,
this is useful to create meta-sheets (like the columns sheet), which are
better created after the parent sheet's first reload, and then should be
reused thereafter.

``Extensible.init(membername, constructor, copy=False)``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If a module wants to store some data on an Extensible class, it can add
a member with a call to that class' ``init()``:

::

    Sheet.init('foo', dict)

This monkey-patches ``Sheet.__init__`` to add the instance member
``foo`` to every Sheet on construction, and to initialize it with an
empty dict. To provide an initial non-object value:

::

    Sheet.init('bar', lambda: 42)

Note: This will not work with the VisiData (vd) object because it is
instantiated very early. Assign member variables directly on the vd
object in the toplevel scope:

::

    vd.bar = []

This member can then be used like any other member of the class.

By default, when an instance of the class is copied, a member specified
with this ``init()`` is reset to a newly constructed value (by calling
the constructor again). If ``copy`` is True, then a copy is made of the
member for the new instance.

``@VisiData.global_api``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When a function is defined in a .py module in visidata, it is available
as a bare 'global' in that module.

VisiData does an effective ``from X import *`` for each plugin and
modular feature, so that its package ("global") scope gets all of the
exposed symbols. `See ``getGlobals()`` and ``addGlobals()`` <>`__.

Everything in a .py module is exported automatically, unless there is an
``__all__`` with a list of the names of the functions that should be
exported, and it will export only those.

Each VisiData feature and plugin should include an ``__all__``, either
empty or with an explicit list of function names to be available to
`commands <>`__ and `Expressions <>`__.

What to extend: ``Sheet``, ``Column``, ``VisiData``, or globals?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Look at what the function uses. If it uses a specific column, use
``@Column.api`` with ``col`` as the first "self" argument, and if you
need access to the sheet, use ``col.sheet``. ``vd`` is always available
as a global.

If it uses a sheet, use ``@Sheet.api`` with ``sheet``. Otherwise, use
``@VisiData.api`` with ``vd``.

Classes and functions which don't use ``vd`` or ``sheet`` at all are
candidates for the list of bare globals in ``__all__``.
